[MUSIC PLAYING]
That should be more evident.
It should be bit more like
what you just struck now.
We're so excited to play a
piece which, to our to
knowledge hasn't been played
since probably, a few years
after you wrote it.
It's a new discovery.
It seems so alive, especially,
amazingly, when you consider
that it's been sitting in
a box, in the Library of
Congress for over 60 years.
It's just recently
been discovered.
We were so excited.
Seems to me to be quite a
test. 60 years in a box.
And the thing's still alive.
Maybe we can play it
again for you now.
Please do.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I was born in Brooklyn
on November 14, 1900.
I was the youngest
of five children.
And we live above a large
department store, on the
corner of Washington Avenue
and Dean Street.
My earliest musical memories are
concerned, I suppose, with
my hanging around my older
sister while she was
practicing her scales.
And she would, after awhile,
look at me down there, and
say, Aaron, why are you
hanging around here?
Why don't you go outside and
play with the other kids?
I didn't know what was
fascinating me.
I couldn't have explained it.
But something about the sound
of music just drew my
attention in such a way that I
wasn't willing to give up.
And gradually she realized
I was particularly
interested in music.
She began giving me
piano lessons.
When his sister had taught him
all she knew, he asked his
parents for lessons with a
professional piano teacher.
There was a certain resistance
there though, I remember,
because my father said after all
we've spent so much money
on the older kids lessons in
music, and look how little has
come of it.
I don't want to waste any
more money on you.
But I was persistent.
And he gave in finally.
Gradually, I found myself not
only practicing what I was
supposed to practice at the
piano, but making up of tunes
of my own and having difficulty
in knowing what
sort of harmonies ought
to go with the tunes.
And finally I decided, I
must have a teacher.
So he began traveling from
Brooklyn when he was 17, to
study with Rubin Goldmark who
impressed Aaron, because he
lived in Manhattan.
He really knew his stuff.
And so, for the four years
that I spent with him, I
really learned the fundamentals
of harmony and
counterpoint, and the form
and composition.
I owe him a lot in that sense.
But Goldmark was a traditional
musician, and Aaron was
already showing signs of needing
to break free of
conventional musical ideas.
I had a little trouble with him,
because I was beginning
to write pieces that from where
he sat, seemed rather
avant-garde, and he couldn't
apply any of his conventional
harmonic ideas to them, because
they didn't have any
conventional ideas
in that sense.
So after four years
with Goldmark,
Aaron headed for France.
The newer music seemed to
be coming from Paris.
Debussy and Ravel were the
hottest things around in those
days, and especially the fact
that Igor Stravinsky was
alive, and living, and
working in Paris.
That was a big draw.
The French decided to establish
a music school for
American students, a summer
music school, in the palace of
Fontainbleau.
When I learned about that, of
course, I jumped at the idea
since it meant that I would
spend my first two months in
Europe with a bunch of
fellow Americans.
At the end of the two month
school, they decided they'd
give a public concert
in Paris.
I believe I played two early
piano pieces, one a Pasicalia,
and the other was a piano
piece called,
"The Cat and the Mouse".
["THE CAT AND THE MOUSE,"
MUSIC PLAYING]
After the concert, in the
green room, to my great
surprise and pleasure, Monsieur
Durand of the famous
French publishers, Durand and
Company came up to me and
said, is that work of
yours published?
I said no.
He said, well, come and see me
in my office, and perhaps,
we'd like to publish it.
So I went to see him
in his office.
And he said, yes, definitely we
would like to publish it.
Here's a check for
so many francs.
It was about the equivalent
of $25 or, at most, $50.
I can't remember exactly.
Here's a check.
And just sign here.
So I would have given him
the piece for nothing.
I was so delighted to be
published, especially by
Debussy's and Ravel's publisher,
so I signed a piece
of paper, and, by golly, I
sell the whole, complete
rights forever, about the
equivalent of $50.
My friend, Harold
[UNINTELLIGIBLE], says it's
the only business mistake
I ever made.
Paris was the place to
be in the '20s, so
they were all there.
Joyce, Hemingway, Fitzgerald,
the writers, as well as the
composers and painters, could
be seen in the cafes and
bookstores.
Although too young and green to
be part of the Paris in the
'20s set, Copland and his cousin
Harold Clurman, who
would become the distinguished
theater director, suddenly
found themselves in this
extraordinary center.
While at Fountainbleau, Aaron
had met the young woman who
would become his teacher.
Fellow students started to talk
to me about a teacher of
harmony called Nadia Boulanger,
and urging me to
visit her class.
And I said, no.
I'm not visiting any
harmony classes.
I've had three years
of harmony.
Don't want to hear anything
more about harmony.
They said, no, no.
Just go and see the
way she does it.
So I was very taken with her.
And very gradually, I began to
think I would like to study
with Nadia Boulanger.
But I hesitated.
Because I couldn't think, in the
whole history of music, of
any well known famous composer
would had ever studied with a
woman teacher.
Nadia Boulanger would become
the single most important
composition teacher
of the century.
Her influence was enormous as
generation after generation of
young musicians flocked to her
studio to study with this
exceptional woman.
She was really a remarkable
personality and an
extraordinary musician.
She knew everything about music
you would want to know.
The oldest music.
The newest music.
A studio was not just a place
where we studied with her.
It was a kind of a musical
center of Paris.
She had her Wednesday afternoon
classes for her students.
And after the class was over,
all the musical great of Paris
came for tea.
I met Stravinsky there.
And I met [? Pulak ?]
and [? Mio ?], all the
younger composers.
I even shook hands with
[? Sansons ?]
in that place.
She really launched
me on my way.
I mean, when it was announced
in the French papers that
Serge Koussevitzky, a Russian
conductor living in Paris, was
named the new head of the Boston
Symphony, she said, we
must go and visit him.
And the end of our visit, he
astonished me by saying you--
pointing to me--
will write a symphony for organ
and orchestra, and she--
Mademoiselle Boulanger--
will come and play the
organ part, as
soloist, with the orchestra.
Well, when we left his
apartment, I said to Nadia, do
you really think
I could do it?
You know, I had never heard a
note of my own orchestration.
I had never written a piece
that lasted half an hour
without pause.
And she sort of shook her
finger at me, and
said, you can do it.
When Nadia Boulanger said you
can do it, that was the end of
the discussion.
You could do it.
The "Symphony for Organ and
Orchestra" signaled Aaron's
return to the United States.
I must say, I've never had the
instincts of an ex-patriot.
I was in Paris in order get
what I wanted to get.
And when I had three years of
it, I decided that was enough.
And the fact that in America,
our popular composers had been
able to develop a style of music
that the whole world
recognizes, specifically
American, made me think, now
why can't we do that
in the field of
serious concert music?
Copland was unknown when
he returned to New
York City in 1924.
But the "Symphony for Organ
and Orchestra" caused a
sensation when it was premiered
early in 1925.
As it happened, the work was
performed first in New York by
Walter Damrosch before being
conducted in Boston by
Koussevitzky.
I was very anxious to be there
when they ran through it for
the very first time.
On that very morning, it snowed
rather badly and the
subway train from Brooklyn
was behind schedule.
Finally, we got to the
42nd Street station.
And, breathlessly, after a two
block run, I arrived at the
front door, grab the door,
opened it, and I got a blast
of my orchestration for
the very first time.
It sounded so much more glorious
than I ever imagined
it was going to sound.
I'll never forget that moment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Mr. Damrosch had a very faithful
audience, especially
Sunday afternoon audience.
A lot of elderly ladies
who just adored him.
And he, undoubtedly, knew in
advance that my rather
contemporary harmonies and the
jazzy rhythms were going to
upset the ladies, so that after
the first performance,
he came to start
the next piece.
And just before he began, he
suddenly turned around to the
audience and said, if a young
man, at the age of 23 can
write a work like the one you
just heard, in five years,
he'll be ready to
commit murder.
Well, of course, everybody
laughed.
And the paper, the next morning,
had a headline,
"Young composer to
commit murder".
The league of composers asked
me for an orchestral
composition to be premiered in
the fall of 1925, under the
baton of Koussevitzky.
I, myself, became very intrigued
with the idea of
writing a work that was
recognizably American within a
serious musical idiom.
Latching on to jazz materials,
I composed a suite in five
parts for chamber orchestra, and
called it, "Music for the
Theatre."
The idea of finding a music
which was recognizably
American in quality, although
it didn't have its origin in
the '20s, seem to flower
most importantly then.
During the teens there had
been a certain wave of
interest in using specifically
American folk songs, or what
passed for such at that time.
But not until jazz came along
did we have a popular American
music that was completely
expressive of our era, and at
the same time, had musical
interest for composers.
[JAZZ MUSIC PLAYING]
Some people in Boston, I
remember, were rather shocked
at the use of jazz materials in
a serious work to be played
in Symphony Hall.
The attitude was, well.
Jazz is all right
in its place.
My heavens, what is it doing
in Symphony Hall?
[JAZZ MUSIC PLAYING]
When Copland played the piano
concerto solo at its premiere
in Boston, ma and pa Copland
were in the audience.
Mrs. Copland said that was
her proudest moment.
But the criticism that bothered
his father was in the
Boston Post. "Copland's Latest
is Poor Stuff." He's been a
storekeeper long enough
to know the
meaning of poor stuff.
My father was rather shocked
by reading the reviews.
He said to me, after all, these
fellows are paid by The
New York Times for
their opinion.
They must know something
about music.
I'd say to him, oh, don't bother
about what they say.
Those critics, they're very
conventional in their tastes.
It's always have
been that way.
It always will be that way.
Copland's piano concerto of
1926 marked the end of his
direct use of jazz.
I have exploited rhythms and
jazz manner up to a certain
point, and I thought,
well that's it.
That's the extent of my
interest. In the possibilities
I personally felt that I
could make use of jazz.
Jazz rhythms would always be
part of his musical sound.
Following the jazz inspired
works, he composed the
"Symphonic Ode," the "Short
Symphony," and the
acknowledged masterwork the
"Piano Variations" of 1930,
played here by Michael
Tilson Thomas.
["PIANO VARIATIONS,"
MUSIC PLAYING]
You certainly can see this piece
as a way of making a
powerful, profound,
serious statement.
It made an enormous impact that
young man to come out and
play this very, very aggressive,
you know,
seemingly unrelenting work.
In the "Piano Variations," there
is an exultancy which is
underneath it.
And part of that is a young
American exultancy in
embracing this
[HARSH PIANO NOTE]
and saying, listen to it.
Isn't it beautiful?
Isn't it gorgeous?
Isn't it like a skyscraper?
[HARSH PIANO NOTES]
It's just going to
stay right there.
It's not going to resolve into
anything else, but just this.
["PIANO VARIATIONS,"
MUSIC PLAYING]
The rhythms of the piece are
profoundly influenced by jazz
and by Stravinsky certainly.
But the two are combined
in a very original way.
And what makes them so original
is how few notes
there are at one time,
the way you're--
["PIANO VARIATIONS,"
MUSIC PLAYING]
In the longer notes in this,
there's a kind of scat quality
almost. You know, it's
right there.
["PIANO VARIATIONS,"
MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, I knew it wasn't an
audience winning piece.
I knew I was writing a piece
that an audience might think
was rather the dissonant and
unpleasant, and tough to
understand at that time.
But that was part, of course,
of the stimulus.
One didn't want to write
music like Chopin.
We were living 100
years later.
Composer and critic Arthur
Berger was at the early
performances of the "Piano
Variations." It was so
different, and so personal
suddenly, as if, this so
called Brooklyn Stravinsky as
he was sometimes called at
times, had changed the whole
historical path of music into
something very American.
Leonard Bernstein heard the
"Piano Variations" early in
his musical career.
Actually it was Arther Berger
who played me--
--oh, for heaven's sakes.
--your old record of the "Piano
Variations." And I
thought they were about the most
wonderful series of notes
I'd ever heard.
And I wanted to learn them,
but I couldn't afford the
sheet music.
Anyway, at that time, I
had just turned 19.
I was a junior at Harvard.
And I was playing this piece at
parties all over the place,
emptying rooms at parties,
playing the "Piano
Variations." One of my
tricks at the time.
Wait till you hear this.
I had an image of Aaron as a
kind of a great patriarch,
with a beard, looking something
like Walt Whitman,
and of a certain age, and
fiery, declamatory, old
testament type, prophet,
because
that's all in the music.
And what was my amazement when
I met him, quite by accident,
at Anna Sokolow's
debut recital.
And next to me, was seated, on
my right, this 37 year old,
lean, charming, smiling, toothy,
happy, affable man.
And when he said, I'm Aaron
Copland, how do you do?
I fainted.
I revived him.
Former President of the
Juilliard School and of
Lincoln Center, Composer
William Schumann.
I think people, sometimes, have
misjudged Aaron, because
he's so affable.
He could be very strong.
I never knew him to be mean.
And I never known him
to lose his temper.
Although he could come
very close to it.
He's a very controlled person.
But he did not suffer fools
lightly, not at all.
Composer Ned Rorem.
I think it's to belittle him
to infer that he was a man
without temperament,
or lust, in fact.
And I can remember seeing
Aaron angry.
I can remember seeing him
extremely impatient.
I can remember seeing him sad.
If Aaron Copland is a saint, as
so many people make you out
to be, the inference seems to
be that saints are without
temptation.
But the very definition of a
saint is a person who has
overcome temptation.
He is a man of art
and sensibility.
And not immune to the slings
and arrows of personal
fortune, as well as professional
fortune.
I think that's important
to be said.
With the "Piano Variations,"
Copland became the undisputed
American leader of the musical
movements of the time.
He became the leader because his
interests were so broad.
And his loft became the
center in New York for
composers to meet.
I remember going there, with--
you'd find 15 or 20 composers,
all around talking about
the problems of the day
and about the music.
He was just the center.
David Diamond was one
of those composers
encouraged by Copland.
He was always concerned
about publication.
Where would we get our
music published?
And indeed, it was
the [? Arrow ?]
Music Purse that was
set up for that.
So Aaron had his hand
in everything.
And it was always in our behalf,
really, that he was
doing things.
It was not for himself.
Composer Jacob Druckman.
Aaron is the kind of person
that goes out and creates
something that was not there,
who looks around and sees a
need for something, who invents
festivals, invents
occasions, invents foundations,
invents ways to
help young composers.
For example, with Composer Roger
Sessions he put together
a series of concerts
devoted to the
music of young composers.
He also organized contemporary
music festivals at Yaddo, the
artist colony in upstate
New York.
Copland's interest in the
avant-garde extended to early
experiments in filmmaking.
He and some other non actor
friends even appeared in one
by the photographer
Rudy Burkhardt.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Money was tight and so composing
had to be fitted
around the lecturing and writing
activities which
earned his living.
It was difficult living in New
York City to get to the
necessary calm.
I used to like to work in the
evenings just because the
telephone tended to stopped
ringing, and everybody was
gone out for the evening, if
they were going any place.
So it was a calm, sort of
settled down from 8:00 to
12:00, let's say, four hours,
where I could work
undisturbed.
And I've always tend to be
a night worker anyhow.
In the depression '30s, many
artists were no longer content
with a small and highly
selective audience.
With the spread of socialism,
Copland, already frustrated
that his difficult music was
not being widely performed,
now wanted to write music
for a broader public.
When Composer Carlos Chavez
invited him to Mexico for the
first all Copland concert
in 1932, the people, the
landscape, and the folk music
as heard in the local dance
hall, where the inspiration for
the piece of music which
would change Copland's
direction, "El Salon Mexico."
["EL SALON MEXICO,"
MUSIC PLAYING]
Copland's change from the
austerity of the "Piano
Variations" to the popularity
of "El Salon Mexico" can be
explained by the social
and political
situation of the times.
Pianist and critic,
Samuel Lipman.
"El Salon Mexico" was written, I
think, about six years later
then the "Piano Variations."
The difference in six years
was the difference from 1930,
the middle of the depression,
the very first years of talking
pictures, the very
first years of electric
phonograph recording, to 1936
or so, which, after all, was the
time of the coming out of
the depression.
It was the election campaign
for the second term of
Franklin Roosevelt.
It was the time of the really
all encompassing battle
against Hitler.
Copland's revitalized interest
in music for the people led
him to compose music for
a variety of uses.
One was an opera for high
school students.
The second hurricane of 1937.
He also composed
for the radio.
Incidental music for plays, and
a full length opera, "The
Tender Land." Recently, he
conducted choruses from it
with the Oratorio Society of
New York, and the American
Symphony Orchestra
in Carnegie Hall.
["THE TENDER LAND,"
SYMPHONY PLAYING]
Copland's most popular music
was composed for ballet.
Billy the Kid was the first to
draw on American folk tunes,
then Appalachian Spring
and Rodeo.
Most ballets are born in the
minds of the choreographer,
not in the minds
of a composer.
And it's a choreographer who
then goes and tries to find a
composer who wants to put that
particular choreographic idea
into music.
Rodeo was born in the mind
of Agnes DeMille.
There was no big
epic premises.
There were no overtones of world
importance or anything.
Just people living their lives
out west. And so I tell him
the story--
Aaron.
Just didn't say a word.
And he's glasses went opaque.
And I said, well,
it isn't Hamlet.
And with that, there was
a raucous laugh.
Just a yelp, and I threw a sofa
pillow at his head, and I
think I didn't miss.
And then we were friends.
This is rare footage of that
first 1942 production of
"Rodeo."
["RODEO," MUSIC PLAYING]
The ballet means
extremely much.
And the way I felt about
him, the way I felt
about America, really.
And the whole war effort, at
that moment, and the fact that
we were fighting for our lives,
and that all our young
men were going out to do or die,
really they're putting
their lives on the line.
All of that was in my work,
whether I meant it to be or
not, it's there.
And it's, to me, the actual
world of this country.
I think Aaron got a great deal
of that in the music.
[RODEO  PLAYING]
These film excerpts provide the
first opportunity to see
the only existing record of
Agnes DeMille dancing in
"Rodeo."
["RODEO," MUSIC PLAYING]
They paid me $15, so at least
they didn't feel that they
were losing money on me.
I got 22 curtain calls.
It was the Metropolitan
Opera House.
Aaron and I held hands and
stood on the stage.
I must say it was
unforgettable, for us, certainly.
And very few opening nights
have been like that.
["RODEO," MUSIC PLAYING]
I remember that Martha Graham
made an appointment with me
and told me she'd love
to have me write a
ballet score for her.
And then she outlined the
ballet, what was going to
happen in it, the
nature of it.
But it had no title.
I went to Mexico that summer,
and I worked on the ballet.
I kept sending her
back parts of it.
And finally, I came back and
stopped off in Washington
where the ballet was
in rehearsal.
And the first thing I said to
her was, Martha, what did you
call the ballet?
She said, "Appalachian
Spring." I
said, what a nice name.
Where did you get it?
She said, well it's the name
of a poem by Hart Crane.
I said, well does the poem
have anything to
do with your ballet?
She said, no.
I just like the title,
and I used it.
But, I can't tell you how many
times people have spoke to me
after a performance of
"Appalachian Spring" and said
to me, you know, when I hear
your music, I can just see the
Appalachians and feel spring.
Martha Graham, in a 1965
film of her ballet.
["APPALACHIAN SPRING,"
MUSIC PLAYING]
Copland's interest in reaching
the American public also
extended to the movies.
"The Heiress," I'm happy to
say, well, won an Academy
Award for the score.
There was a scene where she was
supposed to be taken very
seriously by the audience.
And to the dismay of the
producer and director of the
film, when they tried it out,
as they always do, in some
unknown little theater outside
Hollywood, the audience
laughed at her when
she was stood up.
And the producer came to me, and
said, Copland, you've got
to do something to
save this scene.
If they laugh at her at that
moment, we're finished.
So I completely threw out the
music I had written for the
scene, and wrote a much more
dissonant sounding music than
would be a normal in
a movie house.
["THE HEIRESS," MUSIC PLAYING]
And by golly, when they got to
that scene, there wasn't a
sound in the house.
Same scene, and of course, I'm
sure the audience didn't know
music was being played.
They were so involved.
But there was something about
the tense-ness about of the
music that didn't suggest
anything funny.
And it worked.
In 1940, Copland's music for Of
Mice And Men was central to
the film's emotional impact.
[OF MICE AND MEN, FILM CLIP]
Although Copland never held a
regular university position,
he loved teaching.
At the Tanglewood Music
Center, Copland
taught for 25 summers.
If you were a young composer,
Tanglewood was the mecca.
Copland helped launch the
careers of several generations
of composers.
Many of today's major figures
came under his influence.
Tanglewood, in those years, was
one of the most glamorous
places ever.
Just coming down from the top
with the people closest to me,
the immediate predecessors were
Lenny Bernstein and Lukas
Foss who were outdoing
themselves and in talent and
glamour and just generally
radiating excitement.
And of course, right in the
middle of this was Aaron.
Composer-Conductor Lukas Foss.
Aaron was, in his advice to a
young composer, always very
functional.
He never made prophecies,
big statements.
He would say, what
about this note?
What about this instrument?
I don't think that, that
combination of instruments is
right for what you're
saying in that bar.
When I would come with my new
piece, or half of a new piece,
or an idea for a new
piece, and he would
say, throw it away.
It's warmed over,
[UNINTELLIGIBLE] baby.
Just start all over again.
Forget it.
Or he'd say, that's good.
That bar.
Those two bars are good.
Throw everything else away, and
do something about that.
When he would look at my music,
play it through, or
when I would play it through
with him, he would say, now,
David Diamond, I want you to
be more [? schwezi. ?]
You've got to be more
self critical.
You write too much.
He didn't want to turn
you into another
little Aaron Copland.
He wanted to try to help you
achieve whatever it was you
thought you were about.
And that was extraordinary.
Now the central figure in
America's music, Copland made
his patriotic contribution his
own way, with "Lincoln
Portrait." It's narration was
drawn from the words of
Abraham Lincoln.
And literally hundreds of
distinguished Americans have
narrated "Lincoln Portrait"
since its premier in 1942.
Abe Lincoln was a quiet
and a melancholy man.
But when he spoke of democracy,
this is what he said.
He said, "As I would not
be a slave, so I
would not be a master.
This expresses my idea
of democracy.
Whatever differs from this, to
the extent of the difference
is no democracy.
["LINCOLN PORTRAIT,"
MUSIC PLAYING]
Despite this overt patriotism,
he was accused of disloyalty
by Senator Joseph
McCarthy's House
Un-American Activities Committee.
To cast doubt on the Americanism
of the composer of
"Lincoln Portrait" was really
extremely foolish.
But he couldn't laugh
about that.
Nobody could.
I just felt like kind
of a pawn in his
machinations, I'd call them.
How he happened to arrive at
me, I don't have any idea.
But it wasn't very pleasant
thing to go through.
However, one goes through
it and lives on.
And so, that was that.
And that this nation, under
God, shall have a
new birth of freedom.
And that government of the
people, by the people, and for
the people, shall not perish
from the earth.
["LINCOLN PORTRAIT,"
MUSIC PLAYING]
You spend most of your life
watching conductors conduct
your music.
Finally you get the feeling
that, gee, I'd just like to
get up there, just once, and
conduct my music the
way I dreamt it.
But it isn't so easy to
do that, you see.
But when I finally got the
courage to do it, I found it
was a great source
of pleasure.
Yes.
Try and match what you hear.
The other instruments-- da,
dee, da da, dee dee.
We want to hear the
chord being built.
After 73, 1, 2, 3,
the 4th measure.
1, 2, 3, 1, 2, da da da da.
Yes.
Right there, I'll take the 3/4,
don't bother to play.
1, 2, 3.
1, 2.
Yes.
Don't hurry.
Keep it in the same year,
you're rushing me a bit.
43.
1, 2.
1, 2, 1.
Watch it.
1, 2, 3, 4.
I beat out the 3, 4.
1, da da da da.
It does give one a profound
personal satisfaction to be
able to wield the stick and
get as close to your own
thoughts as to how the piece
should go, and to hear that
really played by a first
class group of
people is a true pleasure.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the '50s, many of Copland's
colleagues returned to a
method of composing
called Serial-ism.
He too, felt he wanted to
use this system again.
It seemed a new way of
thinking about music.
And it produced chords that
you wouldn't have thought
about if you're thinking
tone-ally.
And also, independent lines
moved in a way that you might
not have thought of
if you weren't
using all 12 semitones.
Therefore, it kind of freshen up
one's musical thinking in a
way that, otherwise, you
wouldn't happen upon all by
yourself I think.
Having moved from being a wild
eyed modernist, to the leader
of the established mainstream,
he began traveling all over
the world as an international
ambassador for American music.
At the party to celebrate Aaron
Copland's 70th birthday,
Leonard Bernstein, in his
inimitable fashion, told his
friend and mentor what he
means to his colleagues.
He has already taken his place
in history as a composer of
supreme quality, of sensibility
and vigor.
A pioneer, a craftsman, a lofty
thinker, A man with a
great, old fashioned virtues of
diligence, refinement, care
and commitment.
A man of moderation,
youthfulness, homespun, sweet
tempered, giggly, modest,
friendly, helpful, wise,
Lincoln-esque.
The ideal blend of simplicity
and sophistication.
Dean of American music.
The practical poet.
The stern prophet.
The cheerful spartan.
Good God, what's left to say?
And because no matter how well
they talk, the musicians
communicate best with music.
They embarked on a two piano
version of one of Copland's
most exuberant works;
Danzon Cubano.
[DANZON CUBANO PLAYING]
Whatever Copland uses, whether
it folklore or jazz, it
ultimately is turned
into Copland.
In other words, he
makes his own.
It is a very deep, intrinsic
personality that very quickly
rises to the service.
That is, is there, but
runs deep as well.
There are melodies there which
[UNINTELLIGIBLE] tune for the
rhythms which you can
tap your feet to.
But beyond it, there is an
enormous sense of structure.
He invented almost out of whole
cloth what it means to
be American.
People want to hear
Copland's music.
Enjoy hearing it, because
it makes them feel good.
He is exactly what Leonard
Bernstein said.
He is the best we have. So
he is the one who will be
mentioned first in the histories
of American serious
music, and if only one
person is to be
mentioned, it is Copland.
I think a man wants to become a
creative artist, because he
feels that in using his life
toward that end, he's going to
get down in some tangible form,
which will last. The
basic essence of himself, the
most important feelings he
has, the most important
thoughts, it's a
way of really lasting.
I think that has something
to do with it.
The life being so temporary, and
all, it feels marvelous to
get something down on paper that
makes you feel that you
will live after your own time.
To spend one's life in an art
like music, which has appeal
for everybody, not everybody
has that privilege.
And to have written some works
that people seem to enjoy
hearing is a extra bonus,
you might say.
Aaron Copland continues
to see musicians,
colleagues, and friends.
Among them David Walker, his
longtime assistant, and Vivian
Perlis, co-author of
his autobiography.
At 85, he can look back at
a lifetime in music.
I can't imagine how else I would
have spent my life if
music hadn't existed, because
I knew right from the time I
was 14 years old, that music
was going to be my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]